---
layout: post
title: "Elon - Análise Real - volume 2 - Capítulo 1"
subtitle: "Topology of the Euclidean Space"
date: 2023-05-01 15:00 -0400
background: '/img/posts/01.jpg'
math: true
---

## Section 1

### Exercise 2

Let $$x, y, z \in \mathbb{R}^n$$ such that (with the euclidean norm) $$\|x-z\|=\|x-y\|+\|y-z\|$$. Prove that exists $$t \in [0, 1]$$ such that $$y = (1-t)x+tz$$. Show that this is false with the maximum norm and with the sum norm.

By the triangle inequality we have:
$$
\|x-z\| = \|(x-y)+(y-z)\| \leq \|x-y\| + \|y-z\|,
$$
where the equality holds iff $$x-y=0$$ or $$y-z=0$$ or exists $$\alpha > 0$$ such that $$x-y = \alpha(y-z)$$.

For the first two conditions $$t=0$$ or $$t=1$$, respectively. For the last case, with some algebraic manipulation, we have that:
$$
y = \frac{1}{\alpha+1}x + \frac{\alpha}{\alpha+1}z.
$$

If $$t = \alpha/(\alpha+1)$$, $$y = (1-t)x + tz$$ as we wanted. From $$\alpha > 0$$, $$t$$ is always well-defined and also $$0 < \alpha < \alpha + 1$$ which implies that $$0 < t = \alpha/(\alpha+1) < 1$$.

Now the second part.

Let $$z=(10, 20)$$, $$x=(11, 21)$$, and $$y=(10, 21)$$. Then $$\|x-z\|_1 = \|(1,1)\|_1 =  2$$, $$\|x-y\|_1 = \|(1, 0)\|_1 = 1$$, and $$\|y-z\|_1 = \|(0, 1)\|_1 = 1$$. Clearly, $$\|x-z\|_1 = \|x-y\|_1+\|y-z\|_1$$. However, considering the first components only $$t$$ should be equal to 1, while considering the second components $t$ should be zero. Therefore, there is no $$t\in[0, 1]$$ that satisfy.

Let $$z=(10, 20)$$, $$x=(12, 20)$$, and $$y=(11, 19)$$. Then $$\|x-z\|_\infty = \|(2, 0)\|_\infty =  2$$, $$\|x-y\|_\infty = \|(1, 1)\|_\infty = 1$$, and $$\|y-z\|_\infty = \|(1, -1)\|_\infty = 1$$. Clearly, $$\|x-z\|_\infty = \|x-y\|_\infty+\|y-z\|_\infty$$. However, considering the first components only $$t$$ should be equal to 0.5, while considering the second components $t$ should be 0 or 1. Therefore, there is no $$t\in[0, 1]$$ that satisfy.

#### Observations

The equality conditions previously described applies to **strictly convex spaces**, normed spaces where the closed unit ball is strictly convex (for $$\|\cdot\|_1$$ and $$\|\cdot\|_\infty$$ the unit ball is convex but not strictly convex because it has segments in its boundary). In particular, it applies to Euclidean spaces and normed spaces with $$p$$-norm where $$1<p<\infty$$. Therefore, the previous proof is not only valid for $$p=2$$ but for $$1<p<\infty$$.

The triangle inequality is "generalized" by the Minkowski inequality.

## Section 2 

### Exercise 1

Given $$a \neq b \in \mathbb{R}^n$$ find $$c$$, a point that belongs to the line $$ab$$, such that $$c \perp (b-a)$$. Conclude that for every $$x \in ab$$, where $$x \neq c$$, we have that $$\|c\| < \|x\|$$. Give a geometric interpretation.

The parametric expresion for the line $$ab$$ is $$r(t) = a + t(b-a)$$ where $$t \in \mathbb{R}$$. From $$c \perp (b-a)$$ we have that $$\langle c, b-a \rangle=0$$ then:

$$
\begin{aligned}
0 &= \langle c, b-a \rangle \\
 &= \langle a + t_c(b-a), b-a \rangle \\
 &= \langle a, b-a \rangle + t_c \langle b-a, b-a \rangle
\end{aligned}
$$

which implies that $$t_c = \left( -\langle a,b-a \rangle \right) / \left( b-a, b-a \right)$$.

Consider $$\|x\|^2$$ of an arbitrary point $$x \in ab$$, then:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\|x\|^2 &= \langle x,x \rangle \\
 &= \langle a+t(b-a), a+t(b-a) \rangle \\
 &= \langle a,a \rangle + 2t\langle a,b-a \rangle + t^2 \langle b-a,b-a \rangle
\end{aligned}
$$

From calculus we know that $$\|x\|^2(t)$$ corresponds to a parabola with a minimum somewhere in $$\mathbb{R}$$ and that we could find it making its derivative equal to zero. Therefore, 

$$
\begin{aligned}
0 &= \left( \|x\|^2 \right)' \\
 &= 2\langle a,b-a \rangle + 2 t \langle b-a,b-a \rangle \\
\end{aligned}
$$

and then the minimum value is at $$t = \left( -\langle a,b-a \rangle \right) / \left( \langle b-a,b-a \rangle \right)$$ which is the same as $$t_c$$. Finally, $$\|c\| < \|x\|$$ for any other point $$x \in ab$$.

Geometrically speaking, the point $$c$$ is the closest point of the line $$ab$$ to the origin.
